= Stackable Operator for Apache Superset
:description: The Stackable Operator for Apache Superset is a Kubernetes operator that can manage Apache Superset clusters. Learn about its features, resources, dependencies and demos, and see the list of supported Superset versions.
:keywords: Stackable Operator, Apache Superset, Kubernetes, operator, data science, data exploration, SQL, engineer, big data, CRD, StatefulSet, ConfigMap, Service, Druid, Trino, S3, demo, version

The Stackable Operator for Apache Superset is an operator that can deploy and manage https://superset.apache.org/[Apache
Superset] clusters on Kubernetes. Superset is a data exploration and visualization tool that connects to data sources
via SQL. Store your data in Apache Druid or Trino, and manage your Druid and Trino instances with the Stackable
Operators for xref:druid:index.adoc[Apache Druid] or xref:trino:index.adoc[Trino]. This operator helps you manage your
Superset instances on Kubernetes efficiently.

== Getting started

Get started using Superset with Stackable Operator by following the xref:getting_started/index.adoc[]. It guides you
through installing the Operator alongside a PostgreSQL database, connecting to your Superset instance and analyzing some
preloaded example data.

== Resources

The Operator manages three https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/[custom
resources]: The _SupersetCluster_, _SupersetDB_ and _DruidConnection_. It creates a number of different Kubernetes
resources based on the custom resources.

=== Custom resources

The SupersetCluster is the main resource for the configuration of the Superset instance. The resource defines only one
xref:concepts:roles-and-role-groups.adoc[role], the `node`. The various configuration options are explained in the
xref:usage-guide/index.adoc[]. It helps you tune your cluster to your needs by configuring
xref:usage-guide/storage-resource-configuration.adoc[resource usage], xref:usage-guide/security.adoc[security],
xref:usage-guide/logging.adoc[logging] and more.

When a SupersetCluster is first deployed, a SupersetDB resource is created. The SupersetDB resource is a wrapper
resource for the SQL database that is used by Superset for its metadata. The resource contains some configuration but
also keeps track of whether the database has been initialized or not. It is not deleted automatically if a
SupersetCluster is deleted, and so can be reused.

DruidConnection resources link a Superset and Druid instance. It lets you define this connection in the familiar way of
deploying a resource (instead of configuring the connection via the Superset UI or API). The operator configures the
connection between Druid and the Superset instance.

=== Kubernetes resources

Based on the custom resources you define, the Operator creates ConfigMaps, StatefulSets and Services.

image::superset_overview.drawio.svg[A diagram depicting the Kubernetes resources created by the operator]

The diagram above depicts all the Kubernetes resources created by the operator, and how they relate to each other. The
Jobs created for the SupersetDB and DruidConnnection resources are not shown.

For every xref:concepts:roles-and-role-groups.adoc#_role_groups[role group] you define, the Operator creates a
StatefulSet with the amount of replicas defined in the RoleGroup. Every Pod in the StatefulSet has two containers: the
main container running Superset and a sidecar container gathering metrics for xref:operators:monitoring.adoc[]. The
Operator creates a Service for the `node` role as well as a single service per role group.

ConfigMaps are created, one per RoleGroup and also one for the SupersetDB. Both ConfigMaps contains two files:
`log_config.py` and `superset_config.py` which contain logging and general Superset configuration respectively.

== Required external component: Metastore SQL database

Superset requires an SQL database in which to store its metadata, dashboards and users. The
xref:getting_started/index.adoc[] guides you through installing an example database with a Superset instance that you
can use to get started, but is not suitable for production use. Follow the setup instructions for one of the
xref:required-external-components.adoc[supported databases] for a production database.

== Connecting to data sources

Superset does not store its own data, instead it connects to other products where data is stored. On the Stackable
Platform the two commonly used choices are xref:druid:index.adoc[Apache Druid] and xref:trino:index.adoc[Trino]. For
Druid there is a way to xref:usage-guide/connecting-druid.adoc[connect a Druid instance declaratively] with a custom
resource. For Trino this is on the roadmap. Have a look at the demos linked <<demos, below>> for examples of using
Superset with Druid or Trino.

== [[demos]]Demos

Many of the Stackable xref:demos:index.adoc[demos] use Superset in the stack for data visualization and explaration. The
demos come in two main variants.

=== With Druid

The xref:demos:nifi-kafka-druid-earthquake-data.adoc[] and xref:demos:nifi-kafka-druid-water-level-data.adoc[] demos
show Superset connected to xref:druid:index.adoc[Druid], exploring earthquake and water level data respectively.

=== With Trino

The xref:demos:spark-k8s-anomaly-detection-taxi-data.adoc[], xref:demos:trino-taxi-data.adoc[],
xref:demos:trino-iceberg.adoc[] and xref:demos:data-lakehouse-iceberg-trino-spark.adoc[] demos all use a
xref:trino:index.adoc[Trino] instance on top of S3 storage that hold data to analyze. Superset is connected to Trino to
analyze a variety of different datasets.

== Supported Versions

The Stackable Operator for Apache Superset currently supports the following versions of Superset:

include::partial$supported-versions.adoc[]
